RoboRIO2 Imaging (#1509)
wpilibsuite/frc-docs: source/docs/software/roborio-info/roborio2-imaging.rst

RoboRIO2 Imaging
================

> The roboRIO2 uses a microSD card to hold all of it's software and robot code.

Reviewer: There should probably be some type of intro to say it can be reimaged per the normal instructions, but reimaging the SD card is also an option

Getting the image
-----------------

The image is provided as part of the FRC Game Tools install.  To locate the image you can open the Imaging Tool

Copy the image to your MicroSD card
-----------------------------------

Download and install `Etcher <https://www.balena.io/etcher/>`__ to image the micro SD card. The micro SD card needs to be at least

> 4 GB. Note: a `micro SD to USB dongle <https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0779V61XB>`__ works well for writing to micro SD cards.

Reviewer: I know the default card that comes with the roboRIO2 is 4gb, but I'm guessing smaller cards could be used. The roboRIO 1 only had 512 mb of storage, and the zipped image is only 130mb.

.. figure:: ../vision-processing/wpilibpi/images/installing-the-image-to-your-microsd-card/copy-the-image-to-your-microsd-card.png

Flash the MicroSD card with the image using Etcher by selecting the zip file as the source, your SD card as the destination and

> click "Flash". Expect the process to take about 3 minutes on a fairly fast laptop.

Reviewer: I'm not sure the laptop speed has much to do with imaging time.

RoboRIO2 Imaging
================

> The NI roboRIO 2.0 boots from a microSD card configured with an appropriate boot image containing the NI Linux Real-Time OS, drivers, and libraries specific to FRC. There are two ways to create the SD card -- with the roboRIO using the imaging tool, or with a laptop and an SD burner application.

Reviewer: Will the imaging tool work with a blank SD card? I assume it won't, but this seems to imply that it would.

Author: I don't know how you got that.  It says "boots from a microSD card configured with an appropriate boot image" blank would not be appropriate.

Reviewer: It says two ways to create the SD card. To me that implies from scratch.

Author: It then lists the two ways which are both using an image and an image tool.  I am still not seeing the confusion.

> The NI roboRIO 2.0 boots from a microSD card configured with an appropriate boot image containing the NI Linux Real-Time OS, drivers, and libraries specific to FRC. There are two ways to create the SD card -- with the roboRIO using the imaging tool, or with a laptop and an SD burner application.

Reviewer: Link to other imaging article

microSD Requirements
--------------------

> The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller supports microSD cards.

Reviewer: This seems either incomplete or superfluous. I'd recommend a minimum size and and perhaps some recommendation on replacements

Author: Agreed this was left incomplete and noted [here](https://usfirst.collab.net/sf/discussion/do/listPosts/projects.frc_2021_beta/discussion.ni_utilities.topc2224)

Operation Tips
--------------

The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller requires a fully inserted SD card containing a valid image in order to boot and operate as intended.

> If the SD card is removed while powered, the controller will hang. Once the SD card is replaced, the controller will need to be restarted using the reset button, or it can have the power cycled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the SD card is removed while powered, the controller will hang. Once the SD card is replaced, the controller will need to be restarted using the reset button, or be power cycled.
```

> No damage will result from SD card removal or insertion while powered, but best practice is to perform these operations while unpowered.

Reviewer 2: Should this be a bullet? I'm could go either way on this.

Author: A bullet?  A single bullet seems awkward here but maybe I am not understanding what exactly you are suggesting.

Reviewer 2: The three paragraphs are very much separate from each other with no transitions between paragraph. It's a bit jarring, as it seems like these 3 are separate statements.

Author: I don't think the sentences are that simple.  While they say that they also convey that it won't damage things.  I am not sure what else would be added to that list?

> Imaging Using a Computer

Reviewer 2: How else would we image...? Aliens?

Author: Did you have a suggestion that comment doesn't seem helpful.

Maybe: "Imaging Using a USB Cable to the RIO with the microSD Card Inserted" but that seems really long so I thought that imaging using a computer got the point across.

Reviewer 2: Just "Imaging the SD Card"

Author: I want to convey that there are 2 options for imaging and this is just the direct imaging.

------------------------

> The image will be transferred to the SD card using a specialized writing utility, sometimes called a burner. Several utilities are listed below, but most that can write arbitrary images for booting a Raspberry Pi or similar dev boards will also produce a bootable SD card for roboRIO 2.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image will be transferred to the SD card using a specialized writing utility, sometimes called a burner. Several utilities are listed below, but most tools that can write arbitrary images for booting a Raspberry Pi or similar dev boards will also produce a bootable SD card for roboRIO 2.0.
```

> Supported image files are named FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip and should be located next to this instruction file. You may also locate then by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.

Reviewer: This should give the location of the file, rather then next to this instruction.

Author: will fix with the version comment below when we figure out what we want that to be

> Supported image files are named FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip and should be located next to this instruction file. You may also locate then by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.

Reviewer: Is there something we can copy from the other imaging article about selecting the right version? The current wording doesn't really help someone to determine what the right version is.

Author: I attached their article (remove .txt).  We have done more proofreading then they have.  I don't understand exactly what is meant here either as the current version is "2.3" but I don't see that version on any other "programming tools
![SD_Button](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/15695521/142729894-b69b4001-b63e-452c-8a7e-4e2246d159b5.png)"
[Instructions for SD Imaging.html.txt](https://github.com/wpilibsuite/frc-docs/files/7574665/Instructions.for.SD.Imaging.html.txt)

Author: I have asked for clarification on this.

Reviewer: The regular article just says choose the latest image, which is probably right 99% of the time.

Author: Do we want to just put that then?  I just wanted to understand this.

> Supported image files are named FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip and should be located next to this instruction file. You may also locate then by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Supported image files are named ``FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip`` and should be located next to this instruction file. You may also locate then by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.
```

> If using a non Windows OS you will need to copy this image file to that computer.

Reviewer: Is this necessary, seems obvious. Also, since you still need the imaging tool to update the team number, it doesn't seem like there's a big use case for programming the SD card on a non-Windows computer.

Author: It was asked before where people got the image file on non-windows computers.  I don't know how to judge obviousness beyond that.

.. figure:: images/sd_button.png
   :alt: Click the SD folder icon will bring up the location of the images in windows explorer.

A `microSD to USB dongle <https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0779V61XB>`__ works well for writing to microSD cards.

.. note:: Raspberry Pi images will not boot on a roboRIO because the OS and drivers are incompatible. Similarly, a roboRIO image is not compatible with Raspberry Pi controller boards.

Writing the image with balenaEtcher
-----------------------------------

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add a prepending sentence that states that the instructions are very similar to the WPILibPi installation docs.

Author: Why?  That seems to only help people that are very familiar (have memorized) with the WPILibPi installation.  You talk about making the docs easier to understand for the average reader and I think sentences like this actively work against that.

- Download and install `balenaEtcher <https://www.balena.io/etcher/>`__.
- Launch
- Flash from file >> locate the image file you want to copy to the SD card
- Select target >> select the destination SD device
- Press Flash
- Insert microSD card and boot the roboRIO 2.0

> - Use the roboRIO Imaging Tool to update the team number

Reviewer: Is there a section in the imaging article we can link to for this?

Author: I don't think so it isn't really the same.

Reviewer: I think we should add a section on setting the team number to this article

Author: Because that process isn't clear?  Or are we just taking this opportunity to make people aware of Thad's tool?

Reviewer 2: We can also just link to the regular roboRIO section on setting team number

Reviewer: What section is that? I couldn't find it.

Author: I don't actually see one.  Adding it here makes sense to me.

> - Use the roboRIO Imaging Tool to update the team number

Reviewer 2: We should use `:guilabel:`

Writing the image with Raspberry Pi Imager
------------------------------------------

- Download and install from `Raspberry Pi Imager <https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/>`__.
- Launch
- Operating System >> select Custom and locate the image file you want to copy to the SD card
- Storage >> select the destination SD device
- Press Write
- Insert microSD card and boot the roboRIO 2.0

> - Use the roboRIO Imaging Tool to update the team number

Reviewer 2: We should use `:guilabel:`

RoboRIO2 Imaging
================

.. note:: The imaging instructions for the NI roboRIO 1.0 are :ref:`here <docs/zero-to-robot/step-3/imaging-your-roborio:Imaging your roboRIO>`.

The NI roboRIO 2.0 boots from a microSD card configured with an appropriate boot image containing the NI Linux Real-Time OS, drivers, and libraries specific to FRC. There are two ways to create the microSD card -- with the roboRIO :ref:`using the imaging tool <docs/zero-to-robot/step-3/imaging-your-roborio:Imaging your roboRIO>`, or with a laptop and an SD burner application.

microSD Requirements
--------------------

> The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller supports microSD cards.  It is recommended to use a SDHC or SDXC capacity card, though all types are expected to function correctly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller supports SDHC and SDXC microSD cards with a recommended minimum capacity of 2GB. 
```
I am not aware of any microSD card that is neither SDHC or SDXC. I do not remember what the recommended minimum is. I just went with 2GB as you are not likely to purchase or find microSD cards at a smaller size.

Author: I don't get why your interpretation overrides the advice of the device manufacturer.  You should post on teamforge and discuss the recommendation with them!

> SD (secure digital) cards are the oldest, least used and limited to 2GB of storage.  SDHC (high capacity) cards can store up to 32 GB of data, while SDXC (extended capacity) cards can store up to 2 terabytes (2000 GB).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I suggest removing these sentences unless there is a specific purpose we are explaining the difference between SD, SDHC, and SDXC cards are. I don't really think it fits in the article, perhaps added into the previous paragraph where it can then be edited to the following:
```
The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller supports SDHC (High Capacity) and SDXC (Extended Capacity) microSD cards with a recommended minimum capacity of 2GB. 
```

Author: See above.

Reviewer: I agree with Dalton on this sentence. I don't think it adds anything that's useful for our purposes. It will still be in the manufacturers documentation.

Operation Tips
--------------

> The NI roboRIO 2.0 controller requires a fully inserted microSD card containing a valid image in order to boot and operate as intended.
> 
> If the microSD card is removed while powered, the controller will hang. Once the microSD card is replaced, the controller will need to be restarted using the reset button, or be power cycled.
> 
> No damage will result from microSD card removal or insertion while powered, but best practice is to perform these operations while unpowered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described in the previous section, the NI roboRIO 2.0 controller requires a fully inserted microSD card. This microSD card needs to contain a valid roboRIO image to boot and operate. There are some important things to keep in mind when using the roboRIO 2.0.

If the microSD card is removed while powered, the roboRIO will hang. Once the microSD card is replaced, the roboRIO will need to be restarted using the reset button, or be power cycled.  No damage will result from microSD card removal or insertion while powered, but best practice is to perform these operations while unpowered.

.. note:: If you write files on the roboRIO 2.0 in a robot program (most teams don't do this!), then there is a chance of corrupting these files upon an unexpected microSD card removal.

```

Reviewer 2: Cleaned it up a little bit

Author: As described?  It wasn't described before that it needs a fully seated card?

"valid roboRIO image" is coverd in a later paragraph.

"There are some important things to keep in mind when using the roboRIO 2.0." This sentence adds nothing.

You note is confusing. "most teams don't do this" is that teams shouldn't do this or that it is rarely done?  What is the source on this information?  If true I would like to understand more

Reviewer: Have you experienced file corruption on removal of the SD Cardin a roboRIO2, Dalton?With a journaled file system it shouldn't happen. This isn't a raspberry pit with a fat32 file system. I would recommend not adding that line until it's been proven to be a problem.

Imaging Directly to the microSD Card
------------------------------------

> 
> The image will be transferred to the microSD card using a specialized writing utility, sometimes called a burner. Several utilities are listed below, but most tools that can write arbitrary images for booting a Raspberry Pi or similar dev boards will also produce a bootable SD card for roboRIO 2.0.
> 
> Supported image files are named ``FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip``. You can locate them by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.
> 
> If using a non Windows OS you will need to copy this image file to that computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The roboRIO 2.0 can be imaged via two methods:  USB (traditional) and via the microSD card (new). This section will describe imaging the roboRIO 2.0 by formatting the microSD card directly in your computer.

The image will be transferred to the microSD card using a specialized writing utility, sometimes called a burner. Several utilities are listed below, but most tools that can write arbitrary images for booting a Raspberry Pi or similar dev boards will also produce a bootable SD card for the roboRIO 2.0.

Supported image files are named ``FRC_roboRIO2_VERSION.img.zip``. You can locate them by clicking the SD button in the roboRIO Imaging tool. Select the version that matches the version of the programming tools being used. A mismatch between tools and image may result in inconsistent library dependencies.

If using a non Windows OS you will need to copy this image file to that computer.
```

.. figure:: images/sd_button.png
   :alt: Click the SD folder icon will bring up the location of the images in windows explorer.

A `microSD to USB dongle <https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0779V61XB>`__ works well for writing to microSD cards.

.. note:: Raspberry Pi images will not boot on a roboRIO because the OS and drivers are incompatible. Similarly, a roboRIO image is not compatible with Raspberry Pi controller boards.

Writing the image with balenaEtcher

> -----------------------------------

Reviewer 2: This should be a subsection of the "Imaging Directly to the microSD Card" section.
```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

- Download and install `balenaEtcher <https://www.balena.io/etcher/>`__.
- Launch
- :guilabel:`Flash from file` -> locate the image file you want to copy to the microSD card
- :guilabel:`Select target` -> select the destination microSD device
- Press :guilabel:`Flash`
- Insert microSD card and boot the roboRIO 2.0
- Use the roboRIO Imaging Tool to update the team number

Writing the image with Raspberry Pi Imager

> ------------------------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

.. note:: Raspberry Pi images will not boot on a roboRIO because the OS and drivers are incompatible. Similarly, a roboRIO image is not compatible with Raspberry Pi controller boards.

Writing the image with balenaEtcher
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Download and install `balenaEtcher <https://www.balena.io/etcher/>`__.
- Launch
- :guilabel:`Flash from file` -> locate the image file you want to copy to the microSD card
- :guilabel:`Select target` -> select the destination microSD device
- Press :guilabel:`Flash`
- Insert microSD card and boot the roboRIO 2.0

Writing the image with Raspberry Pi Imager
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Download and install from `Raspberry Pi Imager <https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/>`__.
- Launch
- :guilabel:`Choose OS` -> :guilabel:`Use Custom` -> select the image file you want to copy to the microSD card
- :guilabel:`Choose Storage` -> select the destination microSD device
- Press :guilabel:`Write`
- Insert microSD card and boot the roboRIO 2.0

Setting the roboRIO Team Number
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The image writing process above does not set a team number.  To fix this teams will need to make sure the microSD card is inserted and they are connected to the robot.  With the roboRIO Imaging Tool go to :guilabel:`Edit Startup Settings`.  Next, fill out the :guilabel:`Team Number` box and hit :guilabel:`Apply`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image writing process above does not set a team number.  To fix this teams will need to insert the microSD card  in the robRIO and connect to the robot.  With the roboRIO Imaging Tool go to :guilabel:`Edit Startup Settings`.  Next, fill out the :guilabel:`Team Number` box and hit :guilabel:`Apply`.
```

Author: The reason I didn't phrase it like that is currently the last step above is insert the microSD card.  Do you think I should make this change and remove that step or keep it like it is?

Reviewer: I think it's better in this section, since the last section won't standalone, you still have to do this section.
